Intro to new champions cohort (#1082)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2025-07-03-champions-2025/index.en.md

I am currently an alumnus of the Lede Data Journalism Program at Columbia University in New York, one of the directors of the Brazilian Association of Investigative Journalism (Abraji) and co-organizer of R-Ladies São Paulo.

During the rOpenSci Program, my challenge will be to review and update the [geobr](https://github.com/ipeaGIT/geobr) package, created by [Rafael Pereira](https://www.urbandemographics.org) and used by researchers and journalists from all over the world to generate maps of Brazilian territories.

I signed up for the program because I believe it is a rich opportunity for new learning about R and the world of packages, and to collaborate more intimately with the R community in Latin America.

## Diana Garcia Cortes

{{< figure src = "/img/team/diana-garcia.jpg" width = "250" alt = "Foto de perfil de Diana García Cortes" class = "pull-right" caption = "<strong>Diana García Cortes</br> Dana-Farber Cancer Institute </br> </strong>">}}

> I am a Mexican computational biologist working in the Breast Oncology Program at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. I graduated as an Engineer in Computational Technologies and I have a Master's degree in Computer Science and a PhD in Biomedical Sciences.

Author: ```suggestion
I am a Mexican computational biologist working in the Breast Oncology Program at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. I hold a BS in Computer Science and Technology, a Master’s degree in Computer Science, and a PhD in Biomedical Sciences.

I am passionate about leveraging my programming skills for cancer genomics research. My project involves developing a package to facilitate access to the data from the Metastatic Breast Cancer Project (MBCproject), a joint initiative of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, the Broad Institute, and the Count Me In organization. The MBCproject aims to accelerate research in metastatic breast cancer through the integration of a genomic and clinical dataset, integrated in collaboration with patients and patient support associations.

I am excited to participate in the Champions Program as it offers a great opportunity to learn within a community. I am also eager to receive feedback on my work, contribute to science and open data, and to learn and collaborate with the rOpenSci community.
```

> I am passionate about applying my programming skills in the service of cancer genomics research. My project consists of developing a package to facilitate access to data from the Metastatic Breast Cancer Project, a joint initiative of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, the Broad Institute and the Count Me In organization, which aims to accelerate research in metastatic breast cancer through the integration of a dataset with genomic and clinical data, formed thanks to the collaboration of patients and support associations.

Author: ```suggestion

```

> I am excited to be part of the Champions Program for the opportunity to learn in community, to receive feedback on my work and make contributions in science and open data, and to learn from and collaborate with the rOpenSci community.

Author: ```suggestion

```

I plan to develop a package that will be the gateway to code-based solutions for conservation agents with little experience in the use of R. Entirely written in Spanish and with complete demonstrative examples, I want it to become the initial toolbox for new users, from which to build more complex and specific workflows for particular cases. By participating in the Champions Program, I seek to learn how to promote effective dialogue between management and research, propose processes and promote ways of working to strengthen local capacities that can be sustained over time.

## Maria Valentina Clavijo Mesa

{{< figure src = "/img/team/maria-valentina-clavijo-mesa.png" width = "250" alt = "Foto de perfil de Maria Valentina Clavijo Mesa" class = "pull-left" caption = "<strong>Maria Valentina Clavijo Mesa </br>LASAR3. R-Ladies Medellín  </br> </strong>">}}

> Hello, my name is Valentina Clavijo and I am a PhD student at the Politecnico di Milano (Italy). I am developing my PhD project in the LASAR3 laboratory, focused on the analysis and evaluation of reliability, risk and resilience of complex systems. I am originally from Medellin, Colombia and currently reside in Milan. I am also co-founder of the R-Ladies Medellín chapter, where I actively promote the participation of women and underrepresented people in data science and R programming.

Author: ```suggestion
Hello, my name is Valentina Clavijo, and I am a PhD student at Politecnico di Milano (Italy). I am conducting my research at the LASAR3 laboratory, which focuses on the analysis and evaluation of the reliability, risk, and resilience of complex systems. I am originally from Medellin, Colombia and currently reside in Milan. I am also a co-founder of the R-Ladies Medellín chapter, where I actively promote the participation of women and underrepresented people in data science and R programming.
```

---
slug: champions-2025
title: 'Open Science with a Latin American Identity: Meet the New Cohort of the rOpenSci Champions Program'
author:
- Ana Carolina Moreno
- Diana Garcia Cortes
- Erick Navarro Delgado
- Guadalupe Pascal
- Juan Camilo Rojas Hernandez
- Lucía Rodríguez Planes

> - Maria Valentina Clavijo Mesa

Author: ```suggestion
- Valentina Clavijo Mesa
```

My project in the rOpenSci Champions Program consists of developing a package in R that automates epidemiological surveillance processes, data cleaning and generation of specific analysis for public health institutions in Colombia. This package seeks to improve response times in the field and strengthen the use of open data and official sources.

I was motivated to apply because I consider that this is a great opportunity to learn good practices in the development of R packages and to create tools that generate real impact on public health in my country. In addition, I hope to be able to replicate this knowledge in local communities and contribute to a Latin American network of epidemiology researchers committed to open science.

## Lucía Inés Rodríguez Planes

{{< figure src = "/img/team/lucia-ines-rodriguez-planes.jpeg" width = "250" alt = "Foto de perfil de Lucía Inés Rodríguez Planes" class = "pull-right" caption = "<strong>Lucía Inés Rodríguez Planes </br> Administración de Parques Nacionales </br> R-Ladies Ushuaia </br> </strong>">}}

> I am a biologist, university professor and I work in wildlife conservation in southern Patagonia, Argentina. My undergraduate and doctoral training was at the University of Buenos Aires applying research in population dynamics to the management of situations of epidemiological and conservation interest.

Author: ```suggestion
I am a biologist and university professor working in wildlife conservation in southern Patagonia, Argentina. My undergraduate and doctoral training was at the University of Buenos Aires applying research in population dynamics to the management of situations of epidemiological and conservation interest.
```

Currently I work at the National Parks Administration as a Conservation Science Application Specialist. I have used R to analyze spatial and temporal data from camera traps, long-term wildlife monitoring and evaluation of invasive alien species management plans. I teach ecology to undergraduate and graduate students, technicians and park rangers; and I participate in spaces that promote the inclusion of women and diversity in science and technology, such as R-Ladies Ushuaia.

> I plan to develop a package that will be the gateway to code-based solutions for conservation agents with little experience in the use of R. Entirely written in Spanish and with complete demonstrative examples, I want it to become the initial toolbox for new users, from which to build more complex and specific workflows for particular cases. By participating in the Champions Program, I seek to learn how to promote effective dialogue between management and research, propose processes and promote ways of working to strengthen local capacities that can be sustained over time.

Author: ```suggestion
I plan to develop a package that will be the gateway to code-based solutions for conservation agents with little experience using R. Entirely written in Spanish and with complete demonstrative examples, I want it to become the initial toolbox for new users, from which to build more complex and specific workflows for particular cases. By participating in the Champions Program, I seek to learn how to promote effective dialogue between management and research, propose processes, and encourage ways to strengthen local capacities sustained over time.
```
